**Back to problem solving**

[_I'm still exploring ... this time it's revisiting Rust and whether solving a problem from Advent of Code feels like a fruitful avenue. And is fun._]

Day 1

Create a new project as a library.

`cargo new aoc2021 --lib`

`cd aoc2021`

`git init`

`git add .`

`git commit -m "Initial commit"

Here are the files:

```
.
├── Cargo.toml
└── src
    └── lib.rs
```

Change the default test:

```
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        let result = 2 + 2;
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }
}
```

Add a test and implemention. Starting with the second number, compare each with its predecessor and increment the count if the later number is higher.

```
fn count_increases(numbers: Vec<u32>) -> u32 {
    let mut increases = 0;
    for index in 1..numbers.len() {
        if numbers[index] > numbers[index-1] {
            increases += 1;
        }
    }
    return increases;
}


#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn test_count_increases() {
        let result = count_increases(vec![199, 200, 208, 210, 200, 207, 240, 269, 260, 263]);
        assert_eq!(result, 7);
    }
}
```

Run the test with `cargo test`.

Let's add the parsing part.

```
fn parse(input: &str) -> Vec<u32> {
    let numbers: Vec<u32> = input.split(|c| c == ',' || c == ' ').map(|s| u32::from_str(s).unwrap()).collect();
    numbers
}
```

```
#[test]
fn test_parse() {
    assert_eq!(parse("1,3,5,7,9,11"), vec![1,3,5,7,9,11]);
}
``` 

Now I want to add a "main" so that I can load the input data for the problem and get the result. This is different to writing tests first because we don't know what the expected result should be when using the input data. (But we do with the small example presented on the site.)

So let's do some reorganisation into modules.

Rename `lib.rs` to `day1.rs`.

Create a main.rs and add the following code.

`main.rs`

```
mod day1;
  
use std::fs;

fn solve_day1() {
    let input = fs::read_to_string("day1.txt")
        .expect("Something went wrong reading the file");
    println!("Day 1 Part 1 {}", day1::part1(input));
}

pub fn main() {
    solve_day1();
}
```

I also had to adapt the existing day1 code as I still find myself fighting the types, particularly `String` and `&str`.

```
fn parse(input: String) -> Vec<u32> {
    let numbers: Vec<u32> = input.split_whitespace().map(|s| u32::from_str(s).unwrap()).collect();
    numbers
}
```

```
#[test]
fn test_parse() {
    assert_eq!(parse(String::from("1\n3\n5\n7\n9\n11")), vec![1,3,5,7,9,11]);
}
```  

Also copy the input data into `day1.txt`.

I wrongly assumed at the start that the numbers were separated by commas, but they're actually separated by newlines. So I changed that.

Run the contents of the main:

```
$ cargo run
. . .
Day 1 Part 1 1342
$ 
``` 

Here are the files so far:

```
.
├── Cargo.toml
└── src
    ├── day1.rs
    ├── day1.txt
    └── main.rs
```

**Reflection**: it's been some time since I've dipped into Rust and it was fairly painful. These types may keep the code more predictable but they impose more work on the programmer. And it's non-trivial. 

I'm doing these exercises to learn the concepts in a simpler domain before delving into blockchain smart contract development. And my feeling is you really need to want the benefits of better security and performance that Rust brings in order to want to learn it.

Some language runtimes give you a nice debugger that lets you step through the intermediate formats that some compilers give you. Rust compiles to native code which means you'll need to use a low level debugger and interpret the behaviour of native code.

I'm still not sure if this is a fruitful exercise. If the goal is to write smart contracts, and millions of dollars aren't at stake, perhaps I should use another language which compiles to the forthcoming Ethereum WebAssembly runtime, or Solana's smart contract executor which supports the C language too.

Solving these problems is quite fun to do. If mildly frustrating. But it's more probably as enjoyable, and more productive, than playing chess.


Next steps I'm consdering:
- understand how to write Solana smart contracts better (e.g. https://blog.chain.link/how-to-build-and-deploy-a-solana-smart-contract/)
- is writing smart contracts in C a viable option, or too "dangerous"?
- how about writing a word guessing game in centralised and more de-centralised form, on Ethereum and then on Solana ?
