**Day 3**

[_I dropped my daughter off at the station today and started late so it's a small increment today._]

This [challenge](https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/3) involves processing collections of 1s and 0s.

We have a number of lines (which we can think of as rows) and each line is of the same length. The lines contain a number of binary digits ("bits"), 1s and 0s, which we can think of as columns. Here is some example data.

```
00100
11110
10110
10101
```

The first part of the challenge is to scan each column and produce a a result for each column which is the most frequent bit. This resulting value, called the `gamma rate` is then converted to a number.

Then there is another value called the `epsilon rate` which represents the least common bit in that column.

The problem statement doesn't say what we should do if a column has the same number of 1s and 0s, so let's assume that won't happen.

For a row of width 5, it looks like: 

`gamma_rate + episolon_rate = 2^5 - 1`

or

`epsilon_rate xor 11111 = gamma_rate`

So how should we represent this? I'm inclined to parse the bits into a vector of rows, each of which contains a vector of columns.

Then when processing the data scan each row and add to the `1` and `0` count for each column. The accumulated values could be returned in a Vector of two-element arrays. Arrays are good because they are 0-indexed so the 0 bit count can be in the first element, and the 1 bit count is in the second.

Let's create the template for this, and start with the domain function first, starting with a failing test.

`day3.rs`

```
fn count_column_bits(rows: Vec<Vec<u8>>) -> Vec<[u32; 2]> {
    Vec::new()
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod day3_tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn test_count_bits() {
        let rows: Vec<Vec<u8>> = vec!(
            vec!(0, 0, 1, 0, 0),
            vec!(1, 1, 1, 1, 0),
            vec!(1, 0, 1, 1, 0),
            vec!(1, 0, 1, 0, 0));
        let expected = vec!([1,3], [3, 1], [2, 2], [4, 0]);
        assert_eq!(count_column_bits(rows), expected);
    }
}
```

Here's the output from `cargo test day3_tests`

```
---- day3_tests::test_count_bits stdout ----
thread 'day3_tests::test_count_bits' panicked at 'assertion failed: `(left == right)`
  left: `[]`,
 right: `[[1, 3], [3, 1], [2, 2], [4, 0]]`', src/day3.rs:17:9
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace


failures:
    day3_tests::test_count_bits

test result: FAILED. 0 passed; 1 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```

The failing tests gives us our obvious next thing to tackle.

The input is represented as a vector of vectors of 8-bit integers. And our counting function returns a vector of two-element arrays containing the counts of 0's and 1's in the 0-th and 1st array elements respectively. I selected a 32-bit unsigned integer for the count which should be big enough.

I also added the day3 file details to `Cargo.toml`

```
[[bin]]
name = "day3"
path = "src/day3.rs"
```

Incidentally, here are the relevant files in our directory structure so far.

```
.
├── Cargo.toml
├── input
│   ├── day1.txt
│   └── day2.txt
└── src
    ├── day1.rs
    ├── day2.rs
    ├── day3.rs
    └── main.rs
```

[_Continued 13th April ..._]

In the first I added a failing test for the function to count the number of 0s and 1s in each column. Let's add the implementation:

```
fn count_column_bits(rows: Vec<Vec<u8>>) -> Vec<[u32; 2]> {
    // Initialize Vec<[0,0], [0,0], ...> with 1 and 0 counts for each column
    let mut result: Vec<[u32; 2]> = Vec::new();
    if rows.len() > 0 {
        for _ in 0..rows[0].len() {
            result.push([0, 0]);
        }
    }
    // For each row, cycle through columns and update 0 and 1 counts for that column
    for row in rows {
        for col_index in 0..row.len() {
            let bit = row[col_index] as usize;
            result[col_index][bit] += 1;
        }
    }
    result
}
```
Run tests:

```
test day3_tests::test_count_bits ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

     Running unittests (target/debug/deps/main-49b1ddc57d84dc94)
```

Now we need to count the most common bit in each column:

```
#[test]
fn test_most_common() {
    let column_counts = vec!([1,3], [3, 1], [0, 4], [1, 3], [4, 0]);
    assert_eq!(most_common(column_counts), vec!(1, 0, 1, 1, 0));
}
```    

```
fn most_common(column_counts: Vec<[u32; 2]>) -> Vec<u8> {
    let mut result: Vec<u8> = Vec::new();
    for col_index in 0..column_counts.len() {
        let bit_counts = column_counts[col_index];
        result.push(if bit_counts[0] > bit_counts[1] { 0 } else { 1 });
    }
    result
}
```

[_When I encounter code for the first time my first reaction is ... hmm, what is this doing? And then I go and look for tests. And the test, assuming that it passes, tells me how the creator of this code and hopefully any future maintained are defining how the code should work. It's possible that the test creators have missed scenarios, which is why test coverage matters. But the test communicates the intent of the code and is something that we run regularly as the code evolves, so the tests don't become out of date unlike static documentation._]

We're assuming that no columns have an equal count of 1 and 0 bits. If they were equal would they _both_ be the most column (or neither)? That isn't defined in the problem statement, so for now let's assume it isn't going to happen.

We also need to find the least common bit in each column. There are a number of ways we could do this: 

* by copying the most_common function and modifying the condition to pick the lower count
* by taking whatever is the opposite of the most common bit (we said that we aren't going to allow for the counts being equal)
* some other mechanism

The simplest thing is to take the opposite, or _bitwise not_. So for example, the bitwise not of `101101` is `010010`.

```
fn bitwise_not(bits: Vec<u8>) -> Vec<u8> {
    let mut result: Vec<u8> = Vec::new();
    for bit in bits {
        result.push(if bit == 0 { 1 } else { 0 });
    }
    result
}
```

```
#[test]
fn test_bitwise_not() {
    assert_eq!(bitwise_not(vec![1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0]), vec!(0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1));
}
```

There may be a library function to do this; for long-lived code the priority would be to simplify and re-use standard functions. For now the priority is to get something working.

Actually, we can simplify by mapping over the vector elements and flipping the bit by subtracting from 1:

```
fn bitwise_not(bits: Vec<u8>) -> Vec<u8> {
    bits.iter().map(|&b| 1-b).collect()
}
```

There is a [bitwise not](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38896155/what-is-the-bitwise-not-operator-in-rust) operation but it needs the value to be in binary/integer form.

---

Next, we need to convert the bits to a number:

```
fn from_bits(bits: Vec<u8>) -> u32 {
    let mut result = 0u32;
    for index in 0..bits.len() {
        if bits[bits.len()-index-1] == 1 {
            result |= 1<<index;
        }
    }
    result
}
```

```
#[test]
fn test_from_bits() {
    assert_eq!(from_bits(vec![1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0]), 180);
    assert_eq!(from_bits(vec![1,0,1,0,1]), 21);
}
```    

When converting binary digits to a decimal value, moving right to left the binary values represent powers of two.

So `10111` is 1 (the right-most 1) + 2 + 4 + 16. The bit position for 8 is zero so it doesn't affect the result.

Now we can combne the functions:

```
fn calculate_power(rows: Vec<Vec<u8>>) -> PowerConsumption {
    let column_counts = count_column_bits(rows);
    let gamma_rate = from_bits(most_common(column_counts.clone()));
    let epsilon_rate = from_bits(bitwise_not(most_common(column_counts.clone())));
    PowerConsumption { gamma_rate, epsilon_rate }
}
```

```
#[test]
fn test_power_consumption() {
    let rows: Vec<Vec<u8>> = vec!(
        vec!(0, 0, 1, 0, 0),
        vec!(1, 1, 1, 1, 0),
        vec!(1, 0, 1, 1, 0),
        vec!(1, 0, 1, 1, 0));
    assert_eq!(calculate_power(rows), PowerConsumption { gamma_rate: 22, epsilon_rate: 9 });
}
```

---

[_14th April_]

OK. Let's add the parsing.

```
#[test]
fn test_parse_bits() {
    assert_eq!(parse_bits(String::from("10110100")), vec![1,0,1,1,0,1,0,0]);
}
```

```
fn parse_bits(bit_string: String) -> Vec<u8> {
    bit_string.as_bytes().iter().map(|&b| b-48).collect()
}
```

The `parse_bits` function converts the string to a collection of byte values corresponding to the ascii values. We then convert those to the integer 0 and 1 values by subtracting the ascii value of 0, which is 48.

And the full set of data ...

```
#[test]
fn test_parse() {
    let input = String::from("10110100\n01010110");
    assert_eq!(parse(input), vec!(vec![1,0,1,1,0,1,0,0], vec![0,1,0,1,0,1,1,0]));
}
```    

```
fn parse(input: String) -> Vec<Vec<u8>> {
    input.split_whitespace().map(|row|parse_bits(String::from(row))).collect()
}
```       

And finally we can bring all the pieces together:

```
#[test]
fn test_part1() {
    let input = "00100\n11110\n10110\n10111\n10101\n01111\n00111\n11100\n10000\n11001\n00010\n01010";
    let power_consumption = part1(String::from(input));
    assert_eq!(power_consumption, 198);
}
```    

```
pub fn part1(input: String) -> u32 {
    let bits = parse(input);
    let power = calculate_power(bits);
    power.gamma_rate * power.epsilon_rate
}
```

**Reflections:**

I found myself getting quite frustrated with this post, and this code. And I'm wondering why. A reflection on "what is it for" and "who is it for" might be in order.

I set myself the interim goal of working through these problems. To practise Rust. And demonstrate breaking a problem down into steps.

The thing is with this problem in my view it seems rather pointless. What does it teach? Bit manipulation. That's something that isn't used that commonly. Maybe for compression, like [Base64 encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64) or [Radix sorting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix_sort).

So I found myself thinking that this is not a good use of my time. And it probably isn't a good use of the reader's time too. If I were picking problems selectively I would probably skip this one, or replace it with an example implementation of Base64 encoding.

And this has me thinking about the edges I'm choosing. 

We have a friend who's been coming round to help out while my wife is convalescing. The friend is _really_ good at organising cupboards and has been applying her makeover to some of ours which have taken a low priority to other jobs. And she loves doing it. Whereas my wife enjoys cooking (most of the time) but our friend finds that a real chore.

I remember reading _So Good They Can't Ignore You_ and the point about following your passion being a fallacy (and this insight resonating with me). If you just follow your passion you may end up being disappointed. There is some inevitable graft involved in building the skills that you need to get good at your job in order to be good at it so that you can apply those skills in a way that is rewarding and meaningful for you.

I find some elements of coding enjoyable. Other parts of it are less so. For me, it's about solving problems that have an effect in the real world. I'm not sure that this post achieved that. It _might_ be interesting for some readers, but probably not because of the focus on bit manipulation. 

[_I'd be interested to hear what you find useful about the post ..._]

When I was younger I was much more brash and impatient. Now I'm better at tempering it, but that consumes energy. And I would like to maximise the output of the energy that I'm consuming.

_Play stupid games, win stupid prizes._ I don't want to play stupid games.

I actually find this stuff quite challenging. It requires significant energy to keep doing it. I find the other stuff that happens in family and work life can knock me off balance, and so I would like to maximise the positivity that comes from the work I do, especially given the amount of time that I spend doing it.

I like [this post](https://auth0.com/blog/advent-of-code-tips-tricks/) that takes a look at the AOC problems through the lens of the skills you need (and how those skills might apply to other aspects of coding.

Unless I get any strong indicators that the code in this example was really useful I'm either going to drop this post from the book, or replace it with something else like Base64 encoding, or a [Bloom filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter).

@beaver










